.
My name is Elvira Prieto. I'm a sophomore
in human biology here. I'm from Reedley,
California, which is a small agricultural
town in the San Joaquin Valley. My parents
are migrant workers, and I've worked in
the fields with them all my life, up until
I started coming to school. My name is Eva
Silva. I'm a senior majoring in human
biology with an emphasis on education in
the diverse classroom. And I'm from
Salinas, California, and I'm going to be a
math teacher. My name is Tamara Alvarado
and I'm majoring in Spanish Chicano
Studies. I'm from a town in San Diego
called Escondido and what else? That's it
for now. My name is Julia Gonzalez Luna. I
am a senior majoring in public policy with
a focus on on education. And I'm from
Burbank, California, and I'm going to be a
social studies high school teacher.
Do you want to ask some questions here as
to how this started? In your own words,
how did it start? How did this hunter
strike start and why? Why?
How did it start? Speak to us as if we
don't know. Okay. Speak to me like you do.
Well, I guess it was a buildup of a lot of
different things that have been happening,
not only on this campus, but overall in
this nation with the status of Chicanos
and Chicanas in the United States, in the
universities and everywhere else. So, you
know, I guess I can run down, like, since
my freshman year, so many things have
happened, the closing down of the Office
of Chicano Affairs, and then with all the
threats, with the budget cuts to the
ethnic centers, and just these attacks on
the theme houses, on the ethnic centers,
and everything else, and then the laying
off of Cecilia Burciaga. I mean everything
just like piled down piled down and so
many things are happening that we say wait
we need to do something about it and we
need to change what's going on because
nothing's happening that we want to happen
I'm tired, I'm sorry. No, you sound good.
Some people wonder why you would need to
take a drastic measure like this. I think
you'll say why didn't you? Because the
administration has been very, whenever
we've had like meetings and townhouse
meetings or whatever, get togethers with
any of the administrators, we don't get
any results that we're happy with. And so
it seemed to me like for them to really
understand how extreme the situation is on
this campus and how extreme things are
outside in terms of immigrant bashing and
just the way that people in Ispa Lo Alto
are, that it was maybe the only way that
they would, I don't know if it would touch
their heart or if they would just stop to
think about it or if we could get enough
bad press for this university so that they
could finally just really think about it.
Because otherwise they weren't paying
attention. It was just like everything had
to go business as usual and there seemed
to be this idea about hierarchy here that
it was from top down it was what they said
first and then if we could deal with that
if we as students could deal with what the
university wanted well then that was fine
and if we couldn't that's too bad because
they're at their position because you know
they earned it or whatever yeah because
meeting after meeting like you didn't get
anything concrete from meeting with them
every single time it was just okay I'll
give I'll give you a meeting from 6 to 7,
I'll give you a meeting from 5.30 to 6 or
whatever. We've tried their methods. We've
tried their methods of working things out.
And their methods are to draw things out
for as long as possible in order to not
give us things. At least, you know, they
may say differently, but that's what it
feels like. And it's ridiculous to have to
spend... I'm sorry I'm slow, but I'm a
little bit tired. It's ridiculous to spend
so much time just talking and talking
about things. And they're trying to tire
us out with just talking. So that's what
it had to come to. And when people are not
heard, and this happens in society at
large, when people are not heard, yeah, I
don't know if I want to say abnormal
behaviors, but behaviors that are not
normal are what happen. And yeah, this is
not normal. This is not normal behavior
for us to be not eating. But you know... I
really like to eat. Yeah, we like to eat.
And I emphasize, you know, why are
Chicanos in prison? Why are Chicanos in
poverty? That's not normal. That's not
normal for people. But because of society,
that's how we are. We've waited long
enough for this. I mean, I know the
administration is probably thinking, well,
you know, be patient and these changes
will happen. But we've been patient long
enough. And, you know, the Chicano Studies
major has been, was envisioned back in the
70s, even the 60s. And we've been waiting
since then. And it's about time that we
get recognized. You know, Chicanos are the
biggest, are coming to be a majority in
California. you know, maybe even in the
whole country after a while, but I mean
it's about time that our issues get
recognized and that other people just
realize that we're not going to go away.
And if they don't educate themselves about
us, then it's just going to be worse for
them. Julia, you co-authored a really
beautiful poem entitled Somos Mujeres.
What for you What do you think is the
significance of having four Chicanas
taking the Vanguard role in this movement,
which is really bigger than this campus?
For me, I mean... I don't know. We didn't
really realize it was four women until
somebody pointed it out to us. I mean, we
knew it was girls, but we didn't see it
like, you know, oh, there's no guys here,
and what's up with the guys? but I don't
know I mean we have a lot of supporters
that are male and maybe they didn't say
they're gonna go for the long run but
they've been you know there the whole time
everybody like has had has their roles and
it's like there's some people that are the
negotiators there's people that are
security over here there's like everybody
has a roles and you know we're not the the
most important because if it wasn't for
them then you know nobody would be
listening to us or whatever and there's
other people that have been fasting also
like Felipe sitting over there again he's
been fasting these three days with us as
well and like there's people that
committed to three days and others that do
one one day cycles to show their support
and solidarity it's true there are a lot
of males that are doing really important
stuff in terms of really trying you know
like with the rest of the women also
trying to take care of us and and trying
to watch out for this, and they're just
constantly looking out to see what we need
or what needs to be done for the whole
group. And so it's, I don't know, I don't
know that it's specifically a female thing
to be fasting or anything like that. Yeah,
because I think... Because everybody
really does have their own role, and
everybody's been really supportive, and
we're working together. It just so
happened that we're the ones that... It
was quite... that we're the ones that were
ready mentally at this time to fast. And
it just so happens that we're all women.
People are calling us guerrillas and
revolucionarias.
That's fine. That's nice. That's really
nice. But everybody's been revolutionary.
And you know, it comes down to like... The
focus should be on everybody. Yeah, it
comes down to like what your, you know, I
don't want to say your talents, because I
don't think our talent is to be hungry,
but... But pretty much like everybody is
taking on the role that is best suited for
themselves.
There's Felipe! There's Felipe! You have
all the things that you could have done,
all the actions you could have taken. Why
fasting? Why did you choose to fast?
Well, it's obviously a really strong
statement. It's something that is
uncompromising and it's something that
shows just how serious we are about these
issues. They are issues that our fathers,
grandfathers, and people way before us
have fought for. We have a responsibility
to those ancestors of ours to make sure
that those dreams that they had, that
vision they had, is fulfilled. We can't
just, you know, it may be 20 years, 20,
30, 20 years later from the Chicano
movement that people think is dead, but
it's not dead. We're here and we're living
and we're the Chicano movement.
Felipe, you just joined us, but actually
you've been with us throughout this whole
struggle from the beginning as was pointed
out. Can you tell us a little bit about
yourself, where you're from, and your
reflection on this struggle? Sure. My name
is Felipe Barragan. I'm a freshman,
originally from Los Angeles, California.
This struggle, I think for me, it's
something that's very important because I
went to high school in Watts and a lot of
people know what Watts is like, 1965,
Watts Rebellion, the Ninety-Two Riots.
There I saw issues that the educational
system for high school students and
Chicanos, Latinos there wasn't addressing
the real issues. Once I came here, I got a
taste of it, I got a taste of Chicano
studies and I found out how crucial that
was. And I think that getting involved
with the struggle is important for me to
build the processes with which we learn to
deal with inner city to wipe out the
marginalization of our people.
In terms of your actions, a lot of people
are probably thinking that you came here
to study and that you should be in the
classroom, not protesting.
So you're making a decision, because it is
a pretty tough university to be at and
there's a lot of demands and you're kind
of out there really taking a big chance.
How did you make that decision? See, I
guess the main thing is, I never, when I
came here I didn't want to come and just
study and go to class and go back home,
study, do my work and just concentrate on
myself. While there's people out there,
there's students in the high schools that
are getting pushed pushed out of the
schools, there's the farm workers that are
getting treated badly, there's kids being
born without hands because of the
pesticides that they put on the grapes. I
mean, I can't just sit and concentrate on
my own work and not worry about what's
going on because that's my people, that's
my parents, that's my family, that's
everybody. I wouldn't be able to live with
myself without doing anything about it. I
wouldn't be able to live with myself
without just thinking about myself and my
career and getting straight A's and and
doing my resumes and stuff like that, I
wouldn't be able to do that. I mean, both
things can be done. You know, so, like, I
think that we're doing this so that, you
know, later generations of Stanford
Chicanos and Chicanas don't have to do it.
Today we had, you know, little Chicanitas
and Chicanitos from East Palo Alto come
out and from a Vale Afro-Clerico group
called Raíces de México, and they came out
and they came out and supported us. You
know, they're just little kids. I don't
know, they're probably, like, from 5 to,
like, 12. maybe and you know the reason
we're doing this now and sacrificing our
academic times or study hours or whatever
um you so that they when they come here
you know you know they can focus you know
on on doing the things that they need to
do instead of having to struggle so much i
mean i think it's just like our parents
you know they struggle so that we don't
have to struggle and we don't i mean we
don't struggle we're still struggling but
at a different level You know what I mean?
We're not, I mean, we don't have to worry,
once we get out of here, we're not going
to have to worry about where am I going to
get something to eat like before or how
are we going to pay the bills. We're
probably going to have to, you know, we're
probably going to be able to pay even our
parents' bills. Hopefully, yeah. Yeah, I
think it also goes
back to the question about where, why did
we choose a hunger strike. It's kind of
like, you know, we know that our grades
are going to suffer from this and we're
not going to graduate with a great GPA,
you know, as we could have. And I mean,
it's to show that, I mean, we know that
we're capable of doing a work, but we feel
so strongly about this that we're willing
to do a little bit, you know, worse than
everybody else because our issues are so
important.
I don't know if the administration sees
that, but I don't know if anybody sees
that. I know that I could be a nice
student, but I choose to better be a human
being first, first and to care more about
my people than about my grades. I was
going to ask you, related to the incident
that happened on Sunday at the Flix, the
film, notaries of shows, how do you feel
or what steps can the university take to
educate the student community, even staff
and faculty, about the issue of ongoing
racism, the issue why it's important to
have abandoned graves on this campus. How
do you think the university can take a
proactive role in educating the community?
I think if they really truly believe that
that isn't right, that the incident at
Flix isn't right, or that people should
know and should understand that the
pesticides and the harm that they're doing
to people is wrong, then they should take
it upon themselves to educate this
university. If they really feel
responsible for the education of their
students, if they really, if they believe
that that is an important issue, that
people's lives and people's health and the
reaction of some or a lot of students
finding that amusing, there's something
wrong with that. There's something wrong
with the mentality or with the ignorance
level or something of the students at this
university. And they are responsible
because they're the administrators,
they're in charge of this school. They're
here to serve the students, but they're
also here to help educate them. And
there's, I mean, to me that proved just a
lot of ignorance. It didn't surprise me,
but it was very offensive and it was very
disrespectful. And if they really, if they
agree with that at all, then it's their
responsibility to deal with it. I mean,
the main things that we're, you know, just
to bring up what we're striking striking
about. We have these issues that we have
been dealing with as a community for a
long time. One of them being a campus ban
on grapes, the development of a Chicano
Studies program, and the community center
in Hispalo Alto.
These are things that we can talk about
specifically and offered for Cecilia
Bulciaga. And the offer for a high-level
position for Cecilia Bulciaga, a high
-level administrator here. Why is it
important for the university to recognize
Cecilia's contributions? Why is Cecilia's
position in Cecilia's role included among
these other three? Well basically because
it ties down to the whole approach that
we're taking that our education isn't
addressing the real issues. You know the
issues being poverty, the joblessness, and
you know the over representation we have
in the jails and just everything.
anything. And she ties into that because
Cecilia has always worked for those
issues. She was working on the Boycott
Grapes campaign. And when she gets here,
you get here, she's like a role model.
Oh, man, I'm getting tired. Oh, no, you're
good. Yeah, what we're talking about,
she's a role model and a role mother.
Mother figure. Mother figure. That's it.
No, I guess basically because she helps in
just keeping us here because it's hard to
survive in a campus like this when you
have people like Sunday nights at Flick
saying, beaners go home or, you know,
saying stuff like that here at Stanford. I
mean, how are we supposed to survive in a
climate that doesn't even accept us, that
you have to justify your existence? And
you need people like Cecilia Bustiaga and
like Francis that just help you out just
to make, like, especially the transition
from, like, your first year. I mean,
that's what helped me so much living in
Zapata my very first year is, Because I
survived the whole year because I was
living there, I think. She helped out a
lot with my parents and just everything.
They're always caring for you. She's an
important contact for us. There's so few
of us here. And then there's so few of our
Chicano and Chicana role models here that
we can talk to and say, hey, this happened
to me today. Or, you know, I really, it's
really strange for me to be here and not
be back home where I see a lot of people
who look like myself, you know. And these
are people that you can talk to. Like
Cecilia, you know, she's, she's, I mean, I
find it incredible she always has time to
hear us out. Always. Yeah, when, when I
was a freshman, like I have a really nice
story about her that, when when I, well I
didn't, for some dumb chance, I didn't get
to live in Zapata my freshman year. And
so, so like I had a lot of problems like
just trying to adapt and trying to, trying
to decide like what I was going to do with
my life. And I had this whole big problem
about deciding whether to be a doctor and
secure a good financial future for myself
and for my family or do what I really
wanted to do, which was to be a teacher.
And my, my freshman advisor recommended
that I go to her because he had heard so
many nice things about her that he thought
she could help me. And I remember going
into her office and just like crying my
guts out because I didn't know what, I
didn't know where I fit into this
university. And she talked, she had time,
like she sat with me in her office and
talked to me and encouraged me to do what
I felt was right, you know, to let my
heart decide And, I mean, for the
university not to recognize that she is
capable of keeping me here because I was
ready to leave. And she literally helped
me to stay. And if it wasn't for her, I
mean, I wouldn't be here. All of you are
members of METCHA, Movimiento Estudante de
Chicano. That's long history. What is the
significance of this new phase? And I'm
referring specifically to the various
events that started at UCLA, UC Santa
Barbara, Colorado, University of Colorado,
and Michigan State. Virginia, too.
Virginia, too. Can you talk about this in
the context of the overall resurgence of
MECHA and Chicano student activism? I
think as Mecha is the Chicano student
movement and there's a long history of
activism there, leading back to the
original plan of Plan de Santa Aurora. And
I think that each of us has maintained
that goal of the betterment of la raza.
Our Mecha is very strong and we support
with those founding Mechistas, came up
with in terms of the plan of Santa
Barbara. It's gaining, it's in UCLA and UC
Santa Barbara and other universities,
Mecha members and and other organizations
are taking the leadership and moving the
universities to meet the demands. The
thing is playing instruments to roll.
They got misquoted? Are they in support?
Yeah. So what happened? That sucks man. I
feel bad for lying about it. Oh yeah,
sorry. Sorry. I was going to ask you, I
know earlier I talked to your dad, and I
talked to your mom, and I know from them
that it's been really hard for them. I
mean, they haven't been eating as well.
They're also, in a way, also in the hunger
strike. How do you feel about your
parents' role in this? How are you going
to explain it to your parents once it's
over and you haven't really explained it
yet?
Well, I told my biggest worry in terms of
deciding to take part in the fast was how
my mom was going to take it. Because I
thought she was going to, you know, she's
an asthmatic and I thought she was going
to get sick because any time she stresses
out she has really bad attacks and stuff.
I just knew I was going to worry her and I
was going to hurt her and that was the
thing that scared me the most. But I
talked to her about it and I kind of eased
her into it. But I started telling her
first about the plan to stay out of the
quarter and stuff like that. And she was
like, well, she told me before I even
mentioned to her that I was going to fast.
She said, well, Mija, when you are
leading, when you are a leader and you
want to take part in changing things when
they're bad, sometimes you have to make
sacrifices. She said, and you know,
whatever happens, you guys, you know, you
have my prayers and you have my support.
And so then when I told her, she was like,
oh, and I guess she maybe understood or
was getting, you know, thought that I was
going to get to that because I told her
and she She was like, well, she said, I'm
not going to tell you to do it, and I'm
not going to tell you not to do it,
because I don't want to feel responsible
for you doing it, and I don't want to feel
responsible for you feeling bad because
maybe it didn't succeed or because you
really didn't want to do what you wanted
to. She said, but I'm really scared. But
she said that she had faith in God, and as
long as I had faith in God, that
everything was going to be okay. And so
for me, it was very empowering, because
the minute I got off the phone, I decided,
I decided, I really felt strongly about it
already and I decided that this was
something I was going to do. And even
though I was going to cause her a lot of
pain, that I was going to get through it
and she was going to get through it. And
I'm pretty sure that she hasn't been
eating either. And I haven't been able to
speak with her since that last time I
talked to her. But like she told me, she
said, you know, she said for herself that
she's already past her youth and she
doesn't know that she can do that much
anymore. And she said, it's our turn. And
so here we are, we're trying to make
changes because I don't want to, I really
don't want my little brother to have to do
something like this. And I have a younger
sister who's here also and I don't want
her to have to, you know, continue this. I
mean, she probably won't have to just
because that's the way things are around
here. But, you know, if I can help out in
some way so that, you know, the kids that
come here later don't have to be going
through this, then that would be awesome.
So, yeah.
I guess that was the hardest thing for me
as well. I knew when we thought of the
idea, I knew that I wanted to do it. I
wanted to be part of the hunger strike. I
just knew that I could do it and I was
going to have the willpower to go through
with it. it, but the only thing was my
mom. I didn't know how to tell her. I
didn't know what to tell her. I was scared
because I know that the way my mom is, she
worries and she doesn't sleep at night and
she can't eat. It's just bad. I hate it. I
don't like doing that to her because she
still works and she's getting older and
everything. I don't know. It's just
something I felt so deep from my heart. I
just thought, you know, so many people are
are going to gain a lot from this. So many
people are going to have a lot of things
come out of this, especially with the Ispa
Lo Alto Community Center and with the
boycott on the graves. It's just immediate
help for people that are dying and being
born with birth defects. So when I told
her, she was telling me she didn't want me
to do it. She was telling me I'm anemic,
that I was anemic. Then my dad told me I
had a low red blood cell count. They were
just coming up with all these things that
I had that I shouldn't be doing it because
I was so skinny and I was going to
disappear and this and that. So then, oh,
sorry. So then after,
oh, when I told her, I mean, it was really
hard. She was crying and everything. And
then I called her after the first day of
the hunger strike, like, and she couldn't
talk to me because she didn't want to cry
on the phone. So that just made me, I was
just crying. I was talking to my sister
and my sister was, you know, I was telling
her, tell my mom that I'm not hungry. Tell
her that I'm feeling good, the issues are
keeping me alive and they're going to keep
me alive and I'm going to be okay. So, but
she's going to come today because she's
worried and she wants to see me.
Well, the hardest part of this whole thing
was just to tell my mom and dad that I was
going to do this because we've all said we
don't want to make them suffer. But I told
her and she said, okay, well if you guys
are still out there after three days then
I'm going to come out. out. And then right
like a few minutes before I left I was
talking to her, y me estaba dando la
bendicion. Do I have to translate that?
Oh, okay. And then, um, and then, um, so,
you know, she was crying and I could tell
and she was giving me the bendicion. And
so she was like, you know what, I'm going
to be out there tomorrow and stuff. And,
you know, my mom and dad got some money
together and then so my mom could fly out
here and and stuff. And so she came out
last night and I mean I think it was
better for her to come because she was
upset when she saw me and she was crying
and stuff but she's been really good and
everybody's been really supportive of her
and she's been, I think it makes her feel
good to feel useful to this thing. She
feels a part of this strike and she feels
a part of the movement and I think that
she is because we're fighting for her and
for for everybody. She slept out there
with us last night. She's hardcore. For
me, that was definitely the hardest part.
After I did it, I wished that I didn't
have to, but I know that if I hadn't, it
would have been worse for her if she had
found out some other way. I'm just really
worried about her because she has heart
problems. I was afraid that if she saw me
on the news or something, you know, , you
know, we'd end up everything with yours.
But, you know, she's fine and she already
told me that she supports me. And even
though it's the hardest thing, you know,
for her, like, she knows. So I told her
that it was her who taught me how to fight
and maybe that, hopefully that made her
feel a little bit better but maybe,
hopefully, I don't know. I don't know
exactly how she is. Last time I talked to
her she sounded very weak and my dad
called me like the next morning, the
morning after I told my mom and he tried
his hardest to convince me not to do it.
He told me all kinds of things. And he
told me, why do you want to go through
another hunger after you've suffered so
many hungers in your life? And just
reminding me of all the things that I've
had to go through just to get where I am
and trying to tell me, well, don't do it.
But I still did it, and he's here right
now, and he came and told me. He's still
trying to convince me to stop because he
goes, he says, you know, your mom's going
to come up here tomorrow, and if you're
still on the strike, she's going to strike
with you. I think generally my parents
have the same feelings as all the others
do, but it's a little bit easier for them
to handle because tonight's going to be my
last day fasting. So that's basically it.
Last word, Yvonne? Well, okay. You said
it's for historical purposes, right? So
when, you know, 20 years from now when
other Chicanos look at this, you know,
we... And Chicanas. And Chicanas. Sorry,
I'm tired. You know, when other gente see
this, just to remember that, you know,
even when you're looking at this now, 20
years later, the movement is still alive
in you. And we still have to keep
struggling because, you know... Well,
hopefully we can stop. Hopefully we can
stop some of it, but I mean if it's still
it's still bad, you know now You know we
can do it. Yeah, and don't take advantage
of what You know what you have I guess
like like for us is very important to say
Oh, we have we have a sento and there's a
lot of people that work hard for it Settle
for what you don't settle for you have and
don't forget us pretty much Don't forget
the people who fought before you all the
things like the people that fought before
us and before us and before them and just
remember we're doing this for you for the
future. For the youth!
My name is Sh... Oh, okay. The new message
is this...
It is currently about 7.30 on the 6th of
May, Friday, 1994. We have just collected,
witnessed the five testimonials from five
of the hunger strikers, which have
included at one point over 100 solidarity
strikers. At this time, we've received the
latest response from the Administration,
which has been recalcitrant up to this
point. and I understand that there's still
many points that need to be go need to be
reviewed and some more dialogue that needs
to be that needs to take place but at the
moment it looks as though statement that
that we have made as a community the
Chicano community and the statement that
comes from various communities throughout
the Bay Area and the nation and solidarity
with us has has begun to open the
administration's eyes to the justness of
our cause and our demands. However, as I
said, there still is some work to be done.
For the moment, it seems as though our
first demand, that is the offering of a
high-level position to Associate Dean
Cecilia Bursiaga, is still not being met.
And as I said, this is our first demand
and it's very important to us. So more
negotiation has to go on with regards to
that. The second demand involves the
establishment of a community center in
East Palo Alto to serve the community that
literally works to preserve the
functioning of this university. And as far
as the administration is concerned, they
are receptive to the initiative that the
Chicano students, the Chicano and Chicana
students have presented in terms of
bridging the gap between the community and
the academy. This has been a very
important component to the struggle here.
As a matter of fact, this is a component
that isn't new. It goes all the way back
to the Plan de Santa Barbara, which
inaugurated Mecha. So we are very hopeful
that some breakthrough will come through
here. As regards to the Chicano and
Chicana studies, again, this is the
justness and the feasibility of this
demand has led the administration to also
give overtures that are encouraging.
Finally, the issue of grapes on campus
has, and specifically the negative
reactions, the racist reactions to our
efforts to educate the community at
Stanford has, and our protest, our protest
against those negative reactions has led
the university to embark upon an
initiative to educate all the dorms
through the showing of the no grapes video
and also through establishing a dialogue
with our community, the Chicano community,
in an effort to bridge the gaps that have
been caused,
bridge the divisions that have been caused
by the racism that's very often a result
of an academy which is very hierarchical
and one which is institutionally and
structurally hostile to the presence of
minorities and other marginalized people.
With this, I would just like to say, Que
viva la raza y adelante. We're going to
win this one.
Thank you. Thank you.